spec: abci++ cleanup for v0.37 (#9288)
tendermint/tendermint: spec/abci++/abci++_app_requirements.md

proposer.
Let *s<sub>p,h-1</sub>* be *p*'s Application's state committed for height *h-1*.
Let *v<sub>p</sub>* (resp. *v<sub>q</sub>*) be the block that *p*'s (resp. *q*'s) Tendermint passes
on to the Application
via `RequestPrepareProposal` as proposer of round *r<sub>p</sub>* (resp *r<sub>q</sub>*), height *h*,
also known as the raw proposal.
Let *u<sub>p</sub>* (resp. *u<sub>q</sub>*) the possibly modified block *p*'s (resp. *q*'s) Application
returns via `ResponsePrepareProposal` to Tendermint, also known as the prepared proposal.

Process *p*'s prepared proposal can differ in two different rounds where *p* is the proposer.

* Requirement 1 [`PrepareProposal`, timeliness]: If *p*'s Application fully executes prepared blocks in
  `PrepareProposal` and the network is in a synchronous period while processes *p* and *q* are in *r<sub>p</sub>*,
  then the value of *TimeoutPropose* at *q* must be such that *q*'s propose timer does not time out
  (which would result in *q* prevoting `nil` in *r<sub>p</sub>*).

Full execution of blocks at `PrepareProposal` time stands on Tendermint's critical path. Thus,

> Requirement 1 ensures the Application will set a value for `TimeoutPropose` such that the time it takes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Requirement 1 ensures the Application or operator will set a value for `TimeoutPropose` such that the time it takes
```

* *e<sup>r</sup><sub>p</sub>* may depend on *w<sup>r</sup><sub>p</sub>* and *s<sub>p,h-1</sub>*,
  but may also depend on other values or operations.
* *w<sup>r</sup><sub>p</sub> = w<sup>r</sup><sub>q</sub> &#8655;
  e<sup>r</sup><sub>p</sub> = e<sup>r</sup><sub>q</sub>*
-->
## Managing the Application state and related topics

### Connection State

Tendermint maintains four concurrent ABCI++ connections, namely
[Consensus Connection](#consensus-connection),
[Mempool Connection](#mempool-connection),
[Info/Query Connection](#infoquery-connection), and
[Snapshot Connection](#snapshot-connection).
It is common for an application to maintain a distinct copy of
the state for each connection, which are synchronized upon `Commit` calls.

#### Concurrency

In principle, each of the four ABCI++ connections operates concurrently with one
another. This means applications need to ensure access to state is
thread safe. Both the
[default in-process ABCI client](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/v0.34.x/abci/client/local_client.go#L18)
and the
[default Go ABCI server](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/v0.34.x/abci/server/socket_server.go#L32)

> used a global lock to guard the handling of events across all connections, so they were not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use a global lock to guard the handling of events across all connections, so they are not
```

> concurrent at all. This meant whether your app was compiled in-process with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
concurrent at all. This means whether your app is compiled in-process with
```

Tendermint using the `NewLocalClient`, or run out-of-process using the `SocketServer`,

> ABCI messages from all connections were received in sequence, one at a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ABCI messages from all connections are received in sequence, one at a
```

`/broadcast_tx_sync` or `/broadcast_tx` and waits for the response
before proceeding, it will deadlock. Executing `broadcast_tx` calls
involves acquiring the mempool lock that Tendermint holds during the `Commit` call.
Synchronous mempool-related calls must be avoided as part of the sequential logic of the
`Commit` function.

#### Candidate States

Tendermint calls `PrepareProposal` when it is about to send a proposed block to the network.
Likewise, Tendermint calls `ProcessProposal` upon reception of a proposed block from the
network. In both cases, the proposed block's data
is disclosed to the Application, in the same conditions as is done in `BeginBlock - DeliverTx - EndBlock`.
The block data disclosed the to Application by these three methods are the following:

* the transaction list
* the `LastCommit` referring to the previous block
* the block header's hash (except in `PrepareProposal`, where it is not known yet)
* list of validators that misbehaved
* the block's timestamp
* `NextValidatorsHash`
* Proposer address

The Application may decide to *immediately* execute the given block (i.e., upon `PrepareProposal`

> or `ProcessProposal`). There are two main reasons why the Application may want to do this:

Reviewer: Please comment out this part: it only applies to `FinalizeBlock`. `BeginBlock`, exposes the whole header

This mechanism is nevertheless best-effort (currently based on the indexer)
and does not provide any guarantee of non duplication.
It is thus up to the Application to implement an application-specific
replay protection mechanism with strong guarantees as part of the logic in `CheckTx`.

#### Info/Query Connection

The Info (or Query) Connection should maintain a `QueryState`. This connection has two
purposes: 1) having the application answer the queries Tenderissued receives from users
(see section [Query](#query)),
and 2) synchronizing Tendermint and the Application at start up time (see
[Crash Recovery](#crash-recovery))
or after state sync (see [State Sync](#state-sync)).

`QueryState` is a read-only copy of *ExecuteTxState* as it was after the last
`Commit`, i.e.
after the full block has been processed and the state committed to disk.

#### Snapshot Connection

The Snapshot Connection is used to serve state sync snapshots for other nodes
and/or restore state sync snapshots to a local node being bootstrapped.
Snapshop management is optional: an Application may choose not to implement it.

For more information, see Section [State Sync](#state-sync).

### Transaction Results

> For each transaction withing a block, the Application is expected to return a result within

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each transaction within a block, the Application is expected to return a result within
```

Extra care should be put in the implementation of `ExtendVote` and `VerifyVoteExtension`.
As a general rule, `VerifyVoteExtension` SHOULD always accept the vote extension.

-->
* Requirement 9 [*all*, no-side-effects]: *p*'s calls to `RequestPrepareProposal`,

>   `RequestProcessProposal`, 

Author: YEs, I left it like this to go back and check whether we have things refering to requirements that were deleted so we don't create a mess and meant to discuss this. If we tend to introduce VoteExtensions maybe it makes sense to leave the number as is. But I can also renumber them and then VoteExtension related requirements become 9, 10?

>   `RequestProcessProposal`, 

Reviewer: I would do the numbering in the way you have it here... think of protobufs: we're leaving the corresponding fields "reserved". To me we have the same case here.
We will have some gaps in v0.37.x which will be filled in v0.38.x, I think that's the best course of action.
And I'm convinced vote extensions are coming in v0.38.x, people want them.

Tendermint using the `NewLocalClient`, or run out-of-process using the `SocketServer`,
ABCI messages from all connections were received in sequence, one at a
time.

The existence of this global mutex means Go application developers can get thread safety for application state by routing all reads and writes through the ABCI system. Thus it may be unsafe to expose application state directly to an RPC interface, and unless explicit measures are taken, all queries should be routed through the ABCI Query method.

<!--This is no longer the case starting from v0.36.0: the global locks have been removed and it is
up to the Application to synchronize access to its state when handling
ABCI++ methods on all connections. -->

> <!-- TODO CHeck with Sergio whether this is still the case-->

Author: I added a sentence about this in the next section (on BeginBlock-DeliverTx-EndBlock).

### Transaction Results

> The Application is expected to return a list of results within 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Application is expected to return a result within 
```

via `CheckTx`.
Tendermint ignores this value in `ResponseCheckTx`.

> From v0.37.x on, there is a `Priority` field in `ResponseCheckTx` that can be

Reviewer: Isn't it from v0.34.x ?
Is it gonna stay on v0.37.x ?

Author: For now we do not know what will happen in 0.37 but what might happen if we do get a decision that the priority mempool is out - we keep the code but prevent users from using it for now (at least that was one of the comments from the last meeting). But I can reword all this to 0.34 and then we can change it if need be.

Reviewer: Yeah, I would mention "from v0.34.x on", and then if the decision is made to remove it, we can adapt the text.

used to explicitly prioritize transactions in the mempool for inclusion in a block
proposal.

#### Specifics of `ResponseDeliverTx`

The `BeginBlock-DeliverTx-EndBlock` sequence is the workhorse of the blockchain. 
`DeliverTx` Tendermint delivers the decided block,

> including the list of all its transactions synchronously to the Application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A sequence of `DeliverTx` calls delivers the decided block,
one transaction at a time, to the Application.
```

of blocks, amount of gas used in a block, and the maximum acceptable age of
evidence. They can be set in
[`InitChain`](./abci%2B%2B_methods.md#initchain), and updated in
[`EndBlock`](./abci%2B%2B_methods.md#endblock).
These parameters are deterministically set and/or updated by the Application, so
all full nodes have the same value at a given height.

> 

Reviewer: Could you please remove the `TimeoutParams.*` below?
We are not backporting this from v0.36.x.

Also the `SynchronyParams.*`,  which are PBTS-related, which I think will be backported soon, but won't make it for v0.37.x.

Actually, I just checked `proto/tendermint/types/params.proto` and we should include `ValidatorParams.*`, and `VersionParams.*`

Author: Done!.

This parameter is part of the
[proposer-based timestamps](../consensus/proposer-based-timestamp)
(PBTS) algorithm.
-->

> ##### TimeoutParams.Propose

Reviewer: Please remove `TimeoutParams.*`
